---
layout: post
title: "Improvisation vs Preparation"
date: 2016-04-23 09:44:50 -0500
comments: true
categories:
-   design
-   mechanics
---
*Or preparation as play.*

This post was inspired by long set-up times eating into time-crunched
play time for busy adults.

As a young adult with minimal time commitment I had no problem
spending hours preparing for a gaming session among friends.  And
there was little concern for an hour or two spent setting up a
wargaming afternoon.  But in adulthood these time commitments quickly
eat-in to or completely consume any time that would otherwise be spent
having fun, gaming with your friends.

Certain games are suited more to the *preparation* side of things than
the *improvisation* side.

<!--more-->

Consider the examples I mentioned above, a gamemaster driven
roleplaying game and a tabletop war game.  Certainly these are fun
pastimes but they require preparation on the part of the individual or
all parties involved.

Roleplaying games require, at least initially, the generation of
player characters for all involved, potentially consuming the entire
first play session.  The gamemaster is, at least ostensibly, required
to plot out a scenario for each play session, necessitating an
substantial noninteractive time investment outside of the normal play
session.

For war games, players must spend time constructing armies, generally
away from the interaction at the table.

How does this differ from say playing stickball or baseball with your
friends in an alley or a field with just a stick and a ball?  The game
starts when the minimally necessary instruments arrive, and continues
even as players come and go.  Interrupting these improvised games is
an almost heinous offense, hence the saying "taking the ball and going
home."

To stretch this metaphor beyond the breaking point: in this syllogism,
the polar opposite of pickup baseball or basketball would be ice
hockey, something requiring potentially hours of preparation by a
Zambonist to prepare the playing surface so the players can play for a
relatively short time.

There are a few games that get preparation as play mechanics right,
but I think there is still room for improvement.

-   [Shock](http://glyphpress.com/talk/shock-pdf)

-   [Fate](http://www.evilhat.com/home/fate-core/)

-   [Primetime Adventures](http://www.dog-eared-designs.com/primetime-adventures/)

-   [Microscope](http://www.lamemage.com/microscope/)

-   [How to Host a Dungeon](http://planet-thirteen.com/Dungeon.aspx)

-   [Fiasco](http://bullypulpitgames.com/games/fiasco/)

These games all turn the world gen and character background into an
gameplay activity, typically performed during the first group play
session.  Shock and Fiasco even do away with the necessity of a GM,
allowing players to take turns serving as protagonists, antagonists,
or third parties.  These examples go a long way toward what I mean by
preparation as play, but I don't think the games have captured the
concept entirely.

What I would be interested in seeing is a separate *asynchronous* type
of game, where the preparation has mechanics that boil down to a solo
game.  The results of the each player's solo game(s) are then somehow
incorporated and allowed to influence the collaborative group play
session.  If you know of such a game, drop me a line in the comments
or on [twitter](https://twitter.com/zerosalife).
